# 2.1 Inheritance

## 1. What is inheritance

`Inheritance` is an Object-oriented Programming (OOP) feature that helps to keep your code DRY and easy to maintain. 

Key definition: **For two classes A and B, if A is a special kind of B**, then we say **A inherits from B**. In this case, class `B` is called the **superclass** or (parent class), while class `A` is called the **subclass** or (child class). To indicate the inheritance relationship, add `extends B` in the header of the class `A` when creating it.

Examples:

 * `Cat` is a special kind of `Animal`: `Cat` is the subclass, `Animal` is the superclass.
 * `Basketball` is a special kind of `Ball`: `Basketball` is the subclass, `Ball` is the superclass.

```java
public class Cat extends Animal {		// Cat is a special kind of Animal
}
```

Notice: **X contains/has Y is not inheritance**, in this case, you should define `Y` as a data member in `X`. For example, Library contains Book.

```java
public class Library {
    private ArrayList<Book> books;		// Library contains Book 
}
```

Inheritance can be a **chain**, for example: `Cat` is a special kind of `DomesticatedAnimal`, and `DomesticatedAnimalis` a special kind of `Animal`.

```java
public class DomesticatedAnimal extends Animal{		// DomesticatedAnimal is a special kind of Animal
}

public class Cat extends DomesticatedAnimal{		// Cat is a special kind of DomesticatedAnimal
}
```

Inheritance looks like a family tree. In the previous example, `Animal`, `DomesticatedAnimal` and `Cat` are in a "family", or `hierarchy` technically. Thus, `Animal`, `DomesticatedAnimal` and `Cat` are in one `hierarchy`.

## 2. The benefit of inheritance

When you have two classes `A` and `B`, `A`(subclass) inherits from `B`(superclass), then `A` automatically contains all non-private elements in `B`. 

For example, if you have a superclass `Animal` that contains data members `name` and `age`, then its subclass `Dog` will also have it, without defining it.

```java
// Animal Class with 2 data members and 4 methods
@Getter
@Setter
public class Animal {
    private String name;
    private int age;
}
```

```java
// Dog class extends from Animal class, so it will get all data members and methods from it
// There are 1 data member and 2 methods defined in this class, but it also gets the 2 data members and 4 methods from the super classs, so totally there are 3 data members and 6 methods in the Dog class.
@Getter
@Setter
public class Dog extends Animal {
	private int sportHour;
}
```

If you have one superclass with many subclasses, inheritance can clean the code significantly. Let's say you have a superclass `Animal`, with 5 subclasses: `Dog`, `Cat`, `Monkey`, `Tiger` and `Duck`, if you do not use inheritance, you will have to create data member `name` and `age` for each of them, as getters and setters, they all look the same, thus your code will be WET and difficult to maintain.

## 3. An example of inheritance

When you have to code a hierarchy with many classes, **always follow a top-down order**, which means starting with the superclass, then subclasses, then sub-subclasses... 

### 3.1 Define the superclass

There is no difference between defining the top superclass and a normal class before we learn inheritance.

### 3.2 Defining a subclass

#### 3.2.1 Defining constructors

In a subclass, data members may partly be defined in its superclass, and partly be defined in the subclass itself. Constructors should initialize all data members, not only the ones defined in the subclass.

The superclass has constructors that can be used to initialize the data members defined in the superclass, there is no need to re-invent them again. In this case, you may need to call the constructors in the superclass. And remember, **calling the constructor in the superclass can only be in the first row in the subclass constructor**. To do so, use the keyword `super` to represent the superclass. For example: in the `Dog` class (extends `Animal`), `super()` represents the `Animal` class default constructor `Animal()`.

```java
/**
 * Animal Class with 3 constructors
 */
@AllArgsConstructor
@NoArgsConstructor
public class Animal {
    private String name;
    private int age;
    
    public Animal(Animal animal) {
        this.name = animal.name;
        this.age = animal.age;
    }
}
```

```java
/**
 * Dog class with 1 additional data member
 */
@NoArgsConstructor
public class Dog extends DomesticatedAnimal {
    private int sportHour;

    public Dog(Stirng name, int age, int sportHour) {
        super(name, age);			// calling the all arguments constructor in the Animal class
        this.sportHour = dog.sportHour;
    }

    public Dog(Dog dog) {
        super(dog);			// calling the copy constructor in the Animal class
        this.sportHour = dog.sportHour;
    }
}
```

## 4. Object class

In Java there is a special class named `Object`, technically, every class extends from `Object`. The `Object` class contains some basic methods, such as `toString()`, `equals()`, so whatever class extends from it will automatically have these methods.

## 5. Access Modifier

There are 4 access modifiers: `public`, `private`, `protected`, `default` 

* `public`: no restriction, whatever class anywhere has access to the members.

* `private`: most strict restriction, only the members in the same class have access to it.

* `protected`: not only the class itself can use it, but also 

  * (1) the subclasses in the same hierarchy can also use it,

  * (2) classes in the same package. 

* `default`: it is also called the `package` level access modifier since everything in the same package can have access to the element.
  
## 6. Casting

In Programming 1 we have learned primitive data types, and we can cast one type to another one. There are two different types of casting:

1. auto-casting: to cast a less accurate data type to a more accurate data type, or two data types at the same accurate level, Java can cast the type for you. For example, `double num = 3;` casts `int` to `double`; or `int num = 'a'` castes `char` to `int`.
2. manual-casting: to cast a more accurate data type to a less accurate data type, Java cannot cast the type automatically for you, you have to use `(type)` to cast manually. For example, `int num = (int) 3.14;` casts `double` to `int`.
3. classes in the same hierarchy can also be cast, i.e. a superclass object can be cast to a subclass type, and a subclass can be cast to a superclass type:

4. sub to super: A superclass reference can always point at a subclass object: `Animal animal = new Dog();`, this casts the `Dog` object into an `Animal`. But keep in mind, since the object is created as a dog, the true data type is still a Dog, however, since it is cast to an `Animal`, then it can only use the methods defined in the `Animal` class. You can understand it as there is a prince, that has been turned into a frog. Deep inside it is still a prince, however, it can only jump but not walk.

5. super to sub: A superclass can be cast to a subclass, only if the object is deep inside the subclass type.  You need to use `(subclass)` to cast it manually. You can understand it as the frog prince can be turned back into a prince, but that needs a kiss (manually). And not every frog can turn into a prince, only if the frog is a prince.
   
    ```java
    public class Animal {
        public void eat() {
        }
        
        public void sleep() {
        }
    }
    ```

    ```java
    public class Dog extends Animal{
        public void playWithHuman() {
        }
    }
    ```

    ```java
    public static void main() {
        Dog d = new Dog(); 			// d can eat, sleep and playWithHuman
        Aniumal a = new Dog();		// a can only eat and sleep, but not playWithHuman
        
        Dog d2 = (Dog) a;			// a is casted to a Dog, now it can eat, sleep and playWithHuman
        Dog d3 = (Dog) new Animal(); // Error, the object is Animal, cannot be casted to Dog
    }
    ```

## 7. Instanceof

In the previous example, we have two classes `Animal` and `Dog`, if we have another class `Cat` extends from `Animal` and a `Zoo` class that contains different animals (only cat and dog here) inside.

```java
public class Zoo {
    private List<Animal> animals;
    
    public addAnimal(Animal animal) {
         animals.add(animal);
    }
}
```

When adding objects of the `Dog` class or objects of the `Cat` class to `animals`, since the data type is `List<Animal>`, Java will automatically cast the objects to `Animal`. In this case, we cannot directly call the `playWithHuman()` method from the `Dog` class through an element of the `animals`. Instead, we have to cast it to `Dog` first. But there is a problem here, not all animals are `Dog`s, thus trying to cast a Cat to a Dog will make our code crush. We should only cast an element that is a dog to `Dog`.

A new operator `instanceof` does the job. `instanceof` is a boolean operator that returns `true` or `false`. the syntax is `obj instanceof Class`. If the real class of the object is the same as the second parameter or a subclass of the second parameter, then `instanceof` will equal to `true`, else `false`.

```java
public static void main() {
    Animal a = new Dog();						   // the real type is Dog
    System.out.print(a instanceof Dog);				// true, Dog is Dog
    System.out.print(a instanceof Animal);           // true, Dog is subclass of Animal
    System.out.print(a instanceof Cat);				// false, Dog is not Cat or subclass of Cat
}
```

Back to the previous example, if we want all dogs in the zoo to play with humans, we can use the following code:

```java
public static void main() {
    `````
    for (Animal animal : animals) {
        if (animal instanceof Dog) {  	// only if the animal is Dog
            ((Dog) animal).playWithHuman();			// cast it to Dog, then call the playWithHuman() method
        }
    }
}
```

Since Java 16, we can also directly create a reference for the new object without manually casting while using `instanceof`

```java
public static void main() {
    `````
    for (Animal animal : animals) {
        if (animal instanceof Dog dog) {  	
            // if animal is instance of Dog, then a Dog reference dog will be created.
            dog.playWithHuman();			// call the playWithHuman() method directly from the dog reference
        }
    }
}
```
