# 2.2 Polymorphism

## 1. First glance at Polymorphism

You might have realized that in the previous example (`Animal`, `DomesitcatedAnimal` and `Dog`), the copy constructor in the `Dog` class calls the copy constructor in the `Animal` class. The `Animal` class copy constructor takes one parameter `Animal animal`, but when we were calling the method, we passed `Dog dog` to it. That looks wrong since the data type does not match. However, Java did not complain about it, there was no error if we executed the code. This is called `polymorphism`, which means "many forms". You can understand it like this: The Animal class copy constructor requires a parameter of `Animal`, and since the `Dog` class extends the `Animal` class, it means `Dog` is a special kind of `Animal`. In this case, passing a dog is passing a special kind of animal to the method, the two data types match.

In general, **if a method requires a parameter of class A, when you call the method you can pass an object of class A, or you can also pass an object of any subclass of class A. If the method is overridden in the subclasses, the overridden version will be used.**

## 2. A close look at Polymorphism

Now let's take a look at another example: If we have a class `Animal`, that contains a method a static method `void makeSound(Animal animal)` and an abstract method `abstract void makesound()`, two classes `Dog` and `Cat` extend from the `Animal` class and each of them override the abstract method:

```java
public abstract class Animal {
    public static void makeSound(Animal animal) {
        animal.makeSound();
    }
    
    public abstract void makeSound();
}
```

```java
public class Cat extends Animal {
    public void makeSound() {
        System.out.print("Meow");
    }
}
```

```java
public class Dog extends Animal {
    public void makeSound() {
        System.out.print("Woof");
    }
}
```

If we call the method `makeSound(Animal animal)` in the `Animal` class and pass a cat object to it, the `makeSound()` method in the `Cat` class will be called, while if we pass a dog object to it, the `makeSound()` method in the `Dog` class will be called. In this case, the method that will be executed depends on the class of the object, and this is called `polymorphism`. 

```java
public static void main() {
    Cat c = new Cat();
    Animal.makeSound(c);		// call makeSound() in Cat class, "Meow"
    
    Dog d = new Dog();
    Animal.makeSound(d);		// call makeSound() in Dog class, "Woof"
}
```

## 3. Generics

### 3.1 Basic Generics
With inheritance and polymorphism, developers do not need to write repeated code across different classes, but new problems may appear.

Assume there is a football team and a basketball team, both of them have the same structure, with a field name and a list of players. It is easy to come to our mind that we should create two superclasses `Team` and `Player`, then subclasses `FootballTeam` and `BasketballTeam` that extend from the `Team` class and subclasses `FootaballPlayer` and `BaskerballPlayer` extend from the `Player` class. 

``` java
// player
@AllArgsConstructor
@ToString
class Player {
    private String name;
    private int age;
}

class FootballPlayer extends Player {
    public FootballPlayer(String name, int age) {
        super(name, age);
    }
}

class BasketballPlayer extends Player {
    public BasketballPlayer(String name, int age) {
        super(name, age);
    }
}

// team
class Team {
    private String name;
    private List<Player> players = new ArrayList<>();

    public Team(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }

    public void addPlayer(Player player) {
        players.add(player);
    }
}

class FootballTeam extends Team {
    public FootballTeam(String name) {
        super(name);
    }
}

class BasketballPlayer extends Player {
    public BasketballPlayer(String name) {
        super(name);
    }
}
```

In this case, we do not have to write the `addPlayer()` method twice. But since it is defined in the `Player` class, the `addPlayer()` will accept any kind of player. This may cause potential problems, e.g.: a FootballTeam can add a BasketballPlayer to it.

Of course, we can override the `addPlayer()` method in the `FootballTeam` class and the `BasketballTeam` class so it can take a specific type of player in each class. But then the code is repeated.

A good solution is to use a Java feature called `Generics`, which allows you to add types as parameters when you define a class, the type can be used for type checking. Take the `Team` class for example, the `Team` contains a method `addPlayer()`, which may take a `FootballPlayer` or a `BasketballPlayer` as a parameter, now it takes a super parameter `Player`. We can change it to `T`

``` java
class Team<T> {
    private String name;
    List<T> players = new ArrayList<>();

    public void addPlayer(T player) {
        players.add(player);
    }
}
```

Here `<T>` is the generic type for the class `Team`, `T` stands for `Type`, which is a general abbreviation we use for generic types. The most commonly used type parameter names are:

1. `E` - Element (used extensively by the Java Collections Framework)
2. `K` - Key
3. `N` - Number
4. `T` - Type
5. `V` - Value
6. `S`, `U`, `V` etc. - 2nd, 3rd, 4th types

Now the `addPlayer()` method takes one parameter of `T palyer` instead of `Player player`, where `T` is a parameter on the class level. When creating an object of `Team`, we can pass a specific type to it, and it will be used to determine what `T palyer` will be for the method `addPlayer()`

``` java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    FootballPlayer footballPlayer1 = new FootballPlayer("aaa", 1);
    BasketballPlayer basketballPlayer1 = new BasketballPlayer("bbb", 2);

    Team<FootballPlayer> footballTeam = new Team<>("Vanier");
    footballTeam.addPlayer(footballPlayer1);
    footballTeam.addPlayer(basketballPlayer1);  //ERROR

    System.out.println(footballTeam);
}
```

In this example, the only thing we need to change is to specify the type of `<T>` when creating objects. Here we use `Team<FootballPlayer>` to create the object, thus `T` is `FootballPlayer`, and then the `addPlayer(T player)` method turns to be `addPlayer(FootballPlayer player)` for this specific object. Trying to add a `BasketballPlay` to the team will cause a type-unmatching error. 

You can still create an object of Team without specifying the type of `<T>`, for example, `Team<> footballTeam = new Team<>("Vanier");`. This is called the `Raw use` of generics, which should be avoided in practice.

### 3.2 UpperBound and LowerBound
In the previous example, we have added a `<T>` to our `Team` class, so now it can take a parameter of type when we create a real team object. This is nice, so we can pass `FootballPlayer` or `BasketballPlayer` to it, which can later affect the `addPlayer(T play)` method. But there is a potential problem still, there is no restriction on the parameter `<T>`, that is to say, we can also pass a `String` or `Animal` to it, which does not sound quite right. We do want to add some restrictions to the `<T>`, e.g.: a kind of `Player`. 

To provide some restrictions, UpperBound and LowerBound can be added to generic types. In this example, the `<T>` must be a subclass of `Player`, there is an UpperBound for the value of `<T>`

``` java
@ToString
class Team<T extends Player> {
    private String name;
    List<T> players = new ArrayList<>();

    public void addPlayer(T player) {
        players.add(player);
    }
}

public static void main(String[] args) {
    Team<FootballPlayer> footballTeam = new Team<>();
    Team<Animal> animalTeam = new Team<>(); // ERROR
}
```

An upper bound limits the kind of type parameters you can use when using a generic class. The type used must be equal to or a subtype of the bounded type.

By using the keyword `super`, lower bounds can also be added to generic types.

``` java
class Team<T super FootbalPlayer>
```

In this case, the `<T>` can only be either `FootbalPlayer` or `Player`.
